November 1944, Herman Rothman, a German Jewish refugee, has joined the British army and crossed
the English Channel into Nazi-occupied Europe.
He arrives at Ostend in Belgium.
Almost immediately, we were dive-bombed.
I heard planes coming over, German planes, and starting to dive-bomb the railway station
or somewhere.
The shock of it was so immense, I can't tell you.
And I said, well, that's war.
That is war.
What I've experienced there was theatre compared with, that is war.
April 1945.
The Western Allied forces have entered Germany.
Welshman William Richard Williams, at the time a captain in the 8th British Army Corps,
is tasked with investigating reports of a camp run by the Nazi SS near the town of Bergen.
The first indication we had of things not going quite right was when we got up the River
Aller.
This is where we come to Belsen.
We went through the gate into the camp proper, and it was something which a sight that I
will never forget.
It was just a series of barbed wire, high barbed wire fences.
There were bundles that looked like rags but turned out to be dead inmates.
There were inmates hanging on the wires, fallen beside it, grotesque positions, and you just
had to pick your way through them.
Two were walking and came towards us, and the SS, my escort, just shot them.
As restrictions on enemy aliens were gradually lifted, many German and Austrian refugees
decided to fight back at the Nazis by enlisting in the British armed forces.
Once the Allies began to liberate German-held territory in 1944 and 1945, the horrific fate
of those Jews left behind became clear.
I'm Maurice Brodie, historian at Aberystwyth University.
In this final episode of the Holocaust in Wales, we look at tales of liberation and
of loss.
We hear how Jewish refugees came to Wales to train as they prepared to liberate continental
Europe.
We listen to Welsh servicemen who witnessed the horrors of the concentration camps.
And we learn about survivors who managed to live through one of the darkest periods in
human history and ultimately find a home in Wales.
Initially, enemy aliens were barred from serving in the regular British armed forces.
They were only allowed to join an auxiliary unit known as the Pioneer Corps.
The Pioneer Corps performed non-combatant tasks like trench-sticking, bridge-building
and clearing roads.
Herbert Anderson was an Austrian Jew who came to Britain in February 1939.
He was classified as a friendly alien at the outbreak of war, which meant he avoided internment.
He joined the Pioneer Corps in early 1940 and was initially stationed in Kent.
By the end of that week, we must have been about 200 friendly aliens.
I would think the percentage was as follows.
Germany 60%, Austria 25%, other nationals 15%.
Denomination-wise it must have been Jewish 70%, non-Jewish 30%.
This little refugee army, which grew to a total figure of, I think, 5,000 in the course
of that year, 1940.
Because it was a non-combatant unit, some aliens were unhappy at being restricted to
the Pioneer Corps.
George Lane, originally from Hungary, had been accepted to join the Grenadiers, but
the Home Office found out and ordered his deportation as a friendly alien, since Hungary
was not then involved in the war.
This order was rescinded, but…
I was not allowed to join the Grenadiers, I was only allowed to join the Alien Pioneer
Corps, which made me so angry that I nearly exploded with fury.
And for nearly a year I was using a pick and a shovel, doing navy work for the army.
I quickly became a sergeant and had the most extraordinary section of mostly German Jews,
who were very highly educated people, and there we were, you know, using a pick and
a shovel.
Herbert Andersen's unit, the 87th Pioneer Corps, was soon transferred to Pembrokeshire.
There was a little village called Angle nearby, where we went to the local pub in the evening,
but that wasn't the purpose of our being there.
We had to help the Royal Artillery at Manor Beer.
That's quite a well-known name in the history of the RAF, because it is used as a place
where there is target shooting.
An RAF plane would drag a target behind and the artillery would have to shoot it down.
And what we had to do was to help the artillery, carrying ammunition.
There were always some secondary jobs.
Colin Anson, originally from Berlin, also joined the 87th Pioneer Corps in South Wales.
We landed up in a charming place in South Wales called Drwach the Lindray, quartered
in an old wool mill.
We used to go out on Sondre Pioneer Corps duties there, again, what had originally been
intended – laying mines, laying wire, various things.
But another rather charming development was that a band and orchestra were established.
This 87th Company band and orchestra used from then on to travel about in South Wales,
giving concerts and playing up for dances in, well, over the whole of the western part
of South Wales, which was great fun and which was doubly agreeable for the members of this
band and orchestra, because we were excused general duties and parades since we tended
to be out rather late.
For Hermann Rothmann, who had lived at Gurech Castle in Abergala in the early part of the
war, maintaining his Jewish identity in the army was important.
Hermann joined the Royal West Kent Regiment in 1944.
As I was a religious Jew, I had my twillen with me, you know, which you put on.
I always had these with me, and a small tullis.
And I took this always with me, because to me that was important, that I maintained my
religion.
My belief in God was not shaken in any way.
And I think to a certain extent, if you believe in God, that you have got somebody to fall
back on and to pray, and that perhaps is also a lift, which is natural, which is important
to you, to sustain, to be alive and to want to be, to not give in.
Other soldiers had to shun their Jewish heritage for the cause.
In 1942, a unit of commandos was created, composed almost entirely of German-speaking
Jewish refugees.
They were to carry out operations behind enemy lines, and as such needed to keep their identities
a secret.
George Lane was involved in the recruitment of what became known as X-Trip, whose base
was in the foothills of Errari, Snowdonia.
He was charged with finding suitable billets for the troops.
So I went to Harlech, and I went straight to the police station.
I explained that I had a commando troop and I had to find billets for them.
And they said, oh, there are plenty of empty rooms, don't you worry, it's a perfectly
easy matter, come with us.
You see, so with Constable Jones, I went all over Harlech, he knocked on the door, he said,
Mrs. Jones, listen to the captain.
So I explained, you know.
Mrs. Jones then said, how much they're going to pay?
So I said, well, the War Office gives us two pounds, actually, the allowance for that.
Two pounds a week?
After a question, go away.
So then Constable Jones intervened and said, well, you've got to have them.
You've got an empty room and you should be proud of it that you're going to have a commando
or two.
So we found billets for a lot of them.
But I had a really sleepless night because I thought these women are going to be perfectly
ghastly to my chaps.
And I had no idea what to do.
Well, I needn't have worried.
I walked down the main street the day after my chaps arrived and these women came out
to their houses and they said, Captain, why didn't you tell us they were not English?
We would have had them for nothing.
Alison Williams lived in Aberdovey in Gwynedd.
Her family housed two ex-stripped commandos during the war.
One of them was Kurt Meyer, who took the pseudonym Peter Moody.
She remembers his time in the village.
He was a very gentle chap, very tall, very, very clever.
And actually he and my father, you see, they'd be working all day or whatever and then they'd
come back to the house.
Now then just bear in mind we didn't have electricity, so it was only gas and or candles.
And then they'd be playing drafts then and they'd be at it until about two o'clock in
the morning.
And my mother would say, well, Moody, you need to go because you'll be on duty before
long, you know.
Because he was, Mr Evans, I'm determined to beat you at this game.
He never did.
Colin Anson joined ex-troop after becoming bored with life in the Pioneer Corps.
He remembers his time at Aberdovey as much more rigorous.
The training obviously was very interesting.
Ours was perhaps more angled towards the intelligence side with expeditions to North Wales, the
Snowdonia area for mountain climbing training, rock climbing training.
Even if you only perhaps were going to have an intelligence lecture or compass reading
practice, map reading or what have you, you'd first double up a mountain in order to do
it and then double down again and round the other side when you had finished.
So we were brought up to and kept at a certain stage of fitness.
Eventually, training finished and refugees were thrust into action in Europe.
For those ex-troop commandos operating behind enemy lines, capture was a very serious matter.
In 1942, Hitler secretly issued the Commando Order, stating that all Allied commandos captured
by the Germans were to be shot without trial.
George Lane was captured following a reconnaissance mission near Calais in May 1944.
He managed to convince his captors that he was a lost Navy casualty, disguising his Hungarian
roots by putting on his best Welsh accent.
They were just very unpleasant, telling me every five minutes that I'm going to be shot
and hanged because it was obvious that I was a saboteur.
And although the interrogators spoke better English than I did, I managed to get away
with it by pretending to be a Welshman.
And I went on talking like a Welshman all the time, you know, and because we did all
our training in North Wales and it was, I wasn't deaf in those days, it was much more
in my ear.
I don't know what I sound like now because I'm too deaf.
But then it sounded all right and they did not detect my Hungarian accent.
The Allies may have been closing in on German-held territory, but for Jews trapped in these countries,
life was becoming unimaginably grim.
Eva Klein, who moved to Cardiff after the war, was a Hungarian Jew coerced into becoming
a forced labourer by the Nazis and their Hungarian collaborators.
She and her family were initially moved to the De Bretsen ghetto and in 1944 were forced
aboard a train to Auschwitz-Birkenau extermination camp.
The railway line, however, was bombed and the train was redirected to Austria.
When the deportation started, we were put in cattle cars, 70, 80 people in one, one
bucket for that many people.
It didn't matter who saw you, who didn't.
But if you have to go, you have to go and you had to do it.
You could hardly stand because it was no room.
People were standing on the top of each other.
When we arrived, some dead, some alive.
They just threw out the dead ones and they didn't know where to go.
In Vienna, Eva and her family were forced to work clearing rubble from bombed out buildings.
They were bringing in the frame from the bombs, which were in wooden frames, and we had to
chop them up for firewood.
That's what we did.
This was my main work.
And then with this firewood to fill up lorries and sacks of coals, we were sitting on the
top of the sacks in freezing cold weather and we had to schlep sacks of coals 30 kilo
in one sack.
That was our job.
In April 1945, the British 11th Armoured Division arrived at a camp complex near the town of
Bergen in northern Germany.
Bergen-Belsen was built as a prisoner of war camp, but over time became used as a concentration
camp for tens of thousands of Jews.
Conditions in the camp were hellish.
Starvation and typhus decimated the population.
Welsh Rabbi Leslie Hardman was the first Jewish pastor to enter the camp two days
after its liberation.
It stank a hell of a roll right to the high heavens.
The smell was abominable.
And then suddenly moved a little further and I see the hundreds of thousands of dead bodies.
And then in the middle of the camp there was a...
It was higher than this room.
Shoes and shoes and boots and spectacles and other bits of things.
And then all the lice and the other things were eating into the leather etc.
And this is how they were told to march around whilst the Nazis were in power.
The people had to walk around this terrible scene.
And should they try to turn their heads away they were beaten up by the SS.
William Richard Williams from Cardiff was one of the first British soldiers to witness
the liberation of Bergen-Belsen.
We went further on into the camp and see these corpses lying everywhere.
You didn't know whether they were living or dead.
Most of them were dead.
Some were trying to walk, some were stumbling, some on hands and knees.
But in the lagers, the barbed wire around the huts, you could see that the doors were open.
The stench coming out of them was fearsome.
They were lying in the doorways trying to get down the stairs and fall and just died on the spot.
Eva Klein escaped en route to Mauthausen concentration camp in Upper Austria,
but was recaptured and sent to Theresienstadt in Czechoslovakia.
The Red Army liberated the camp in May 1945.
And even then we didn't really believe it was the end of the war.
They said it was.
But we were still in this place.
We couldn't go anywhere.
We couldn't go out at all.
We couldn't even go to the yard.
On entering Bergen-Belsen, the immediate tasks for the Allies, including William Richard Williams,
were to arrange for food and medical care for the survivors and to bury the dead.
I think one of the more horrific sites at that time was where some of the bodies couldn't be
moved manually and had to be literally bulldozed along the ground into the pit.
This, I think, was...
I think we all believe that there should be dignity in death.
And I think this was the one aspect of the clear up which perhaps...
Well, it couldn't have been handled any other way.
There was no human way which could have been done except this.
But it was one of the more horrific, I think, sites of that camp.
Leslie Hardman officiated at the funerals of thousands of inmates at a time.
He recited the Kaddish, a Jewish funeral prayer.
We tried to do it for every single one.
When I did the first burial, the second burial, through 5,000 bodies,
some of the inmates came to stand by me.
And they used to comfort one another.
They said, look, at least your brother, your sister, our friends here,
at least a religious service, what we call a Yiddish word, is being mentioned over the graves.
We don't know whether our mothers and fathers are.
They're probably just fertilising the ground of the Polish fields.
Most of them were burnt, destroyed.
So they used to comfort one another.
I said, some kind of service.
Survivors tried to rebuild their lives as best they could.
Eva Klein returned to Hungary, but had no word of the fate of two of her brothers.
Some people came to look for my eldest brother,
whom they met in Mauthaus in Gunsgatien, and they couldn't imagine why he is not home yet.
He had typhoid, and I think he died the last day of the war,
or when they were liberated.
But Soltán, the other brother, he was in the Russian camps.
As they said, he disappeared. He disappeared with the other few hundred thousands.
Six million Jews were murdered during the Holocaust.
They died in concentration camps like Bergen-Belsen and Theresienstadt.
They died in death camps like Auschwitz-Birkenau and Treblinka.
They were gassed, shot, starved, and succumbed to diseases like typhoid.
They were murdered for no other reason than because they were Jews.
In this podcast, we have explored the connections between the Holocaust and Wales.
We have listened to the stories of refugees who found sanctuary in Wales,
and the terrors from which they fled.
The Holocaust did not just happen to other people in another place and time.
It is part of all of our history.
By studying this history, we ensure that victims are not forgotten,
and hope to prevent the horrors of the Holocaust from ever being repeated.
Thank you for listening.